---
title: pass: how to use unix password manager in unix and ios
date: 2021-07-22 09:29:20
author: bsantanad
draft: true
---

# password123 is not going to make the cut

So you came into the realization that you need a password manager. Why? well
that's beyond the scope of this blog post. But well, at least you have the
first step down. (if you truly dont know why, watch this [video][youtube])

Now you are sufring the web looking for the best deal, or the best option.
Self-hosted? a reasonable suscription? well depending on who you are there is
probably a good option for you.

If you are like me and dont mind doing some work while learning a thing
of two about encryption and unix, then I have a blog post for you :). If not,
then you are probably better off looking else where.

What password manager we will use in this howto/blog?

# pass

In pass [website][web] they call it the standard unix password manger, and with
good reson. It has the characteristics that a any unix tools should have:
_modularity_, _simplicity_, _composition_ and so on.

The issue here is that we want to use the password manager not only in our unix
machine, but instead in our phone, on the go, or in mulitple devices at once.

Can we do that with pass? you didn't read the title did you?

Here is what we will do:

* generate gpg public and private keys
* install pass in our unix machine
* store passwords encrypted by gpg
* see how to use it on our unix workstation
* push the encrypted passwords to a remote git respository
* use ios client to get the encrypted passwords


# genereate gpg keys

to be honest, here I wanted to explain the history of openpgp, pgp, gpg and
all that, but it would take a good chunk of the post to do that


[web]: https://www.passwordstore.org/
[youtube]: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3NjQ9b3pgIg
